
 [Worlds.com]                 |  Development Kit Table of Contents  |

Gamma Overview

 Getting Started            Building with the Shaper

    * Introduction to          * Introducing the
      Gamma                      Gamma Shaper
    * System Requirements           o The Menu Bar
    * Installing Gamma              o The Options
    * Establishing                    Menu
      Content Directories      * The Hierarchy of
    * Setting Up to Use          Objects
      World-Builder            * Beginning to Build:
      Commands                   Deleting, Adding
    * Starting Gamma           * Sky, Ground, and
    * World Files and            Infinite Background
      Content Files            * Moving Objects in
    * Moving in a Virtual        3D
      World                    * Connecting Rooms
    * WorldsMarks and            and Creating
      Teleporting                Portals
                               * Connecting Portals
                               * Textures
                               * Lighting
                               * Holograms
                               * Using Libraries
                               * Behaviors, Actions
                                 and Sensors
                               * Designing for
                                 Performance

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Using the Overview

 There are two sections to the Overview document. In the first section, Getting
 Started, you will start at the beginning: installing Gamma and getting
 yourself oriented with the program. Building with the Shaper has brief
 explanations of features with links to more detailed Gamma Procedures.

 When you see an arrow image like this: [Top of Page] click on it to go back to
 the table of contents at the top of this page.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Introduction to Gamma

 Gamma is a powerful toolkit for creating and viewing 3D multiuser virtual
 environments. These "virtual worlds" are complex 3D spaces, richly textured,
 brought to life both with programmed behaviors and the virtual presence of
 users' avatars that share the experience and communicate in real time.

 Gamma consists of three main components:

    * WorldsPlayer. WorldsPlayer is the 3D equivalent of a Web Browser: it is
      the window that allows you to see a virtual world, constantly updating
      the screen display so that any changes are immediately visible. The
      WorldsPlayer resides on each client PC, along with the files that define
      a virtual world. If the files don't exist locally, they can be downloaded
      through the network and cached or written locally.
    * The Shaper. The Shaper is a set of tools for constructing virtual
      environments. It enables you to build architectural structures, add
      textures to them, and integrate actions that happen in these spaces. When
      you save a world, the Shaper creates a .WORLD file. These .WORLD files
      (and related content files) are the files that will be placed on or
      downloaded to each client PC, and are interpreted by the WorldsPlayer.
      The Shaper is not required for end users to view a virtual world. End
      users install "external" versions of WorldsPlayer which do not include
      the Shaper.
    * Servers. The server handles all the details of multiuser interactivity,
      constantly updating chat text, avatar positions, and other shared state
      information over the network. Multiple servers can be used to distribute
      the load of very large or busy environments. A separate, optional User
      Server handles authentication, user tracking, and database interactivity.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 System Requirements

 The minimum configuration is a 90 MHz or faster processor, with 32 MB of
 memory.

 The recommended platform is a Pentium-class processor, 133 MHz or faster, with
 48 MB of memory.
 Windows 95, 98, 2000 or NT
 80 MB free hard disk space
 Active Internet connection

 If your system has less memory than recommended you may find that navigation
 in the 3D space is slow or jerky. The frame rate (the number of frames
 rendered per second) can be improved if you follow the Designing for
 Performance guidelines later in this document.

 [Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Installing Gamma

 To install your "Internal" version of Gamma (which includes the Shaper),
 follow these steps:

   1. Download Gamma from your designated FTP or Web site, or insert the Gamma
      CD into your CD-ROM drive.
   2. From the Start menu choose Programs/Windows Explorer.
   3. In Windows Explorer, locate the current GDK.EXE file. The name will
      include the current version number; for example, GDK1804.EXE.
   4. If you downloaded Gamma from the Internet, it will be in the target
      directory you specified for the download. If you are loading Gamma from a
      CD, it will be visible on your CD-ROM drive.
   5. Double-click the GDK.EXE file to begin the installation process. The
      installer will lead you the rest of the way. For building worlds, you
      might want to put the InternalWorldsPlayer on your C:\ drive where it's
      easy to get to.

 [Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Establishing Content Directories

 Unless you specify a different directory path, Gamma looks for all content
 files (textures, 3D models, sound files, etc.) in the \InternalWorldsPlayer
 directory.

 It is helpful to organize your content files in subdirectories under
 \InternalWorldsPlayer . Make a subdirectory for each project within which
 you'll save all .WORLD files relevant to that project (e.g.
 C:\InternalWorldsPlayer\Project). Within this project directory, also create a
 separate subdirectory for textures (as well as one for sounds if needed, e.g.
 C:\InternalWorldsPlayer\Project\tex).

 [Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Setting Up to Use World-Builder Commands

 Many of the commands mentioned later in this document are .bat files in the
 gdk's bin directory. Many of these require that the bin directory be mentioned
 in your PATH statement.

 To use these properly, edit your C:\AUTOEXEC.BAT file and look for the last
 "set PATH=blah" statement. Change this to "set PATH=c:\gdk\bin;blah", changing
 the c:\gdk part to the location of the gdk on your machine. Then reboot the
 machine.

 Now the commands max2rwx (converting 3D Max files to .RWX), bodtorwx
 (converting avatar models to .RWX), compit (a compression program for .BMP
 files), and so forth will work correctly from any directory on your machine.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Starting Gamma

 From the Start menu, go to Programs/Worlds/InternalGDK/InternalGDK

 Or, use the Internal WorldsPlayer icon that was automatically placed on your
 desktop.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 World Files and Content Files

 The Shaper saves the architecture of a world as a .WORLD file, a proprietary
 format. In addition to the basic geometry, the .WORLD file includes references
 to the art files that serve as surface textures, as well as the files for any
 imported 3D models, Java behaviors, and sound effects. Gamma accepts a variety
 of file formats for these content files.

 NOTE: Content files should be organized into appropriate subdirectories which
 must be identified to Gamma. See Establishing Content Directories for more
 details.

 The file formats needed to create content for Gamma are described below.

 Art Files

 For art files that are used as surface textures, Gamma accepts .BMP and .CMP
 (a compressed version of the .BMP file). See Compressing Texture Files for
 details on how to convert .BMPs to .CMPs

 Photoshop(c) .PSD, .TIF, and other file formats must be converted to .BMP
 before using them as textures. Textures must also be 128x128, 256x256,
 128x256, or 256x128 in size. If your texture is not one of these sizes, Gamma
 will automatically "squash" it to be 128x128. See Designing for Performance
 for details.

 3D Shapes

 3D models that are imported into Gamma must be in the .RWX or .RWG format, the
 standard file format for 3D models recognized by Gamma's Renderware ®
 rendering engine. 3D Studio Max ® includes a built-in conversion utility to
 create .RWX files. Any textures associated with an .RWX file must be saved as
 .BMP or .CMP files.

 Audio Files

 Sounds can be incorporated into worlds as .WAV or .MID files. Sound files can
 also be placed on a server and downloaded dynamically.

 Video Files

 Videos can be incorporated into worlds as .ASF files. These files would reside
 on a server and be "streamed" into a 3D world.

 [Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Moving in a Virtual World

 Finding your way around in a 3D environment is easy. We instinctively move as
 we would in the real world, and the less we are aware of how this happens, the
 better. But while building a 3D world, you need to do other things besides
 move around. You need to select objects, enter choices, and identify precise
 locations in three-dimensional space. To cover both these situations, Gamma
 includes two completely different ways of navigating, using the cursor or
 "driving" in virtual space.

 When the cursor is visible, as it is when you first start Gamma, mouse
 movement controls the cursor. You can choose from menus and select objects in
 the 3D space.

 To begin driving, click the Drive button located below the 3D viewing window
 (the red triangular shaped button) and hold down the mouse button as you
 "scrub" your mouse. The cursor disappears, and you can now move freely about
 the World by moving your mouse. When you release the mouse button, the cursor
 reappears.

 While driving, you move through the 3D space as if you were a moving camera, a
 point of view that shifts as you move the mouse forward, backward, left or
 right. You can also use the following keys:

 Up Arrow:   move forward
 Down Arrow:    move backward
 Left Arrow:    turn left
 Right Arrow:    turn right
 Page Up:    look up
 Page Down:    look down
 Home: look level (undoes any change in look up or down)

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 WorldsMarks and Teleporting

 This section describes the ways that you can navigate within Gamma. Note: When
 you are building worlds, be sure to save any changes to the world you're
 working on before Teleporting to another world.

 WorldsMarks

 WorldsMarks work pretty much like the bookmarks you're used  [WorldsMark Menu]
 to from web browsers. To set a WorldsMark for the place
 you're in, go to the WorldsMark button on the right panel
 of the WorldsPlayer interface and click Add new WorldsMark. That WorldsMark's
 location will come up in a dialog box and you'll have a chance to rename the
 WorldsMark to something that's easier to remember before you commit that
 WorldsMark to the menu. If you want to edit the name, click on the Name field
 and make your edits, then click OK.
 Whenever you want to return to that location, go to the WorldsMarks menu and
 select your desired destination from the list at the bottom of the window.
 WorldsMarks persist across sessions, so you can set a WorldsMark once and
 expect that you'll be able to use it again the next time you use the Shaper.
 The WorldsMarks menu also has an Edit WorldsMarks option that allows you to
 access and change bookmarks through a standard Gamma dialog. You can add,
 delete, copy, rename or go straight to a bookmark destination using various
 options in the Edit Bookmarks List.

 Change Location Option

 You can directly enter the .WORLD file, Room, coordinates and facing you'd
 like to go by clicking on the Change Location option in the WorldsMark menu.
 The information must be entered in this order:

 [Change Location window]

 The .WORLD file location#The Room name@The coordinates of the Camera listed in
 x,y,z, facing order

 The .WORLD file location sometimes begins with "home:" which means "search
 relative to the directory you installed Worlds into". So if the URL line says

 home:/GroundZero/GroundZero.world

 for the .WORLD file location, WorldsPlayer will automatically expand this into
 something like

 c:/program files/worlds/internal worldsplayer/groundzero/groundzero.world.

 If you are creating a world from scratch, and you've just saved it to your
 hard drive, the URL line would start with something like:

 file:c:/internal worldsplayer/MyProject/MyWorld.world

 The .WORLD filename and the Room name are separated by a # hashmark. The Room
 name and the coordinates are separated by an @ ampersand. Sometimes you'll see
 <> brackets before the @ ampersand. Normally nothing is in these brackets, but
 if a world has reached capacity, then the server assigns users to a new
 dimension (basically a copy of the world) and this is designated inbetween the
 <> brackets. After the @ ampersand, each coordinate number is separated by a
 comma. Omitting a Room entry will bring you to that worlds' default room, the
 first in the list. Omitting coordinates places you in a default position.

 The world information is a filename of the .WORLD file, not the name of the
 world you entered in World Properties. Because this is a file name you can
 also enter path information for .WORLD files that aren't in your Gamma root,
 for instance:

 C:/myworlds/example.world#RumpusRoom<>@100,400,120,25

 When you go to WorldsMarks and choose Change Location, the URL line will
 already be showing the location you are currently at, so you can just place
 the insertion mark at the coordinates and change them if all you want to do is
 move to a different point in the same Room, or change the Room name if you
 want to move to a different Room within a world. Once you're done changing the
 URL line, press OK to go to that destination.

 Teleporting

 If you download and install a "World-A" through an .exe file,    [Teleporting]
 World-A will appear on your Teleport list. The various teleport
 locations (bookmarks) that have been created within World-A
 will appear as a sub-list when you rollover the world's name. This listing of
 installed worlds is not really useful to someone building new worlds. However,
 the list above the installed worlds is the Back (History) list, which can be
 used to teleport to various worlds used in a session. Every world you visit
 during a Gamma session will be listed here, and you can click on that world to
 teleport back to it.

 NOTE: if you create a new world within a session, the world won't appear on
 the Back list unless you leave the world and come back to it, or re-open the
 world from the File menu.

 See Gamma Procedures - Packaging Worlds for instructions on creating teleport
 bookmarks within a finished world

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Introducing the Gamma Shaper

 When you first start up Gamma, a default New World opens (if you already have
 worlds installed, Gamma will open to your default world. To get to a New
 World, choose File, New). This is the most basic world - four walls, a floor
 and a ceiling.

 To open (or close) the Shaper, go to the Options button on the right side of
 the WorldsPlayer interface and select Shaper On/Off.

  [The Shaper]

 The four sections of the Shaper are:

 1. Hierarchy Tree (see the next section, The Hierarchy of Objects)
 2. 3D World Viewer
 3. Libraries (see Using Libraries)
 4. Properties Box - the contents of this window change depending on what's
 selected in the Hierarchy Tree

 You can switch the location of the four Shaper sections by clicking on the
 tiny yellow tab in between each section, and you can change the relative size
 of each section by clicking and dragging the yellow tab where their four
 corners meet.

 The buttons above the Properties Box change depending upon the object you have
 selected in the Hierarchy Tree. The image below shows you the buttons
 available if you select, for example, a wall. When working in the Shaper, the
 function of each button appears below the row of buttons as you roll over them
 with your cursor. They are, in order: Move horizontally, Move vertically,
 Pitch, Roll, Yaw, Scale, Cut, Copy, Paste, Save to File, and Undo. Each of
 these buttons will be covered further in the Tutorials.



 To help you orient yourself within a room, the bottom left-hand corner of the
 Cyan wall in a newly-created room is always 0,0,0 in the coordinate scheme of
 that Room. The default wall colors of a newly created room may also serve as
 an orientation device:

    * Cyan is the "East-facing Wall"
    * Red is the "West-facing Wall"
    * Magenta is the "North-facing Wall"
    * Yellow is a "South-facing Wall"

 NOTE:

 There is no such thing as "true North", "true East," et. al. within Gamma. You
 can join two "East-facing walls" but neither has to face true East; as such,
 "East-facing" is merely a description of your present orientation. Not having
 a "true north" can be an advantage, but it can also be confusing, so many
 people do try to keep a sense of "true north" from room to room as they build,
 for instance by hooking portals in one room's South wall to the other room's
 North wall.

 Also note that Gamma's walls, floors and ceilings are only visible from one
 side. If you want a wall to be seen from both sides, you'll have to use two
 walls. See Lesson 1: Building and Exploring a New Room for further
 explanation.

 The Menu Bar

 The top menu bar has four menus: File, Edit, Libraries, and Worlds. Many of
 the menu items are not generally used.

 File Menu

    * New
      Opens a new, default square room.
    * Open
      Opens any .WORLD file
    * Save
      Saves your .WORLD file
    * World Properties
      Displays the World Properties in the Properties Box
    * Console Properties
      Displays the DefaultConsole Properties in the Properties Box
    * Pilot Properties
      Displays the HoloPilot Properties (camera) in the Properties Box
    * Inventory
      Brings up an Inventory window. Not currently used.
    * Exit
      Quits the program

 Edit Menu

 The quick keys for this menu (e.g. Ctrl+X) either don't work or are
 unreliable. Usually world builders use the buttons above the Properties Box
 rather than the Undo, Cut, Copy or Paste items in the Edit Menu.

    * Undo
      Will undo the last command used in the Shaper.
    * Cut
      Removes the selected object.
    * Copy
      Copies the selected object.
    * Paste
      Pastes either the Cut or Copied object into the section of Hierarchy you
      select.
    * Sortable Attributes
      Brings up a window in which you can arrange attributes to better suit
      your needs. For example, in the Rect Properties there is an attribute
      called Extent. In the Sort Attributes window, if you type in Extent,
      click Add, and then click OK, the next time you use the Shaper the Extent
      attribute will be listed at the top of the Rect Properties list.
    * Snap Tool Settings
      Brings up a window in which you can set x,y and z "Snap Values" which
      will place objects such that their origins are at some multiple of those
      increments. For example, if you set an increment of 50 for x and y, you
      could place objects at (150, 250) but not at (229, 510). The tool will
      snap the object to the nearest point that matches the criteria.

 Libraries Menu

    * New Library
      Not used. At this time, you cannot create new libraries.
    * New Library Entry
      Not used. At this time, you cannot add library entries.
    * Icons On/Off
      Toggles between displaying library entries as icons with text or just
      text. You can also use Ctrl+I.

 Worlds Menu

 This menu lists the worlds that have been visited during a session. You can
 select one of the worlds listed to teleport back to it. NOTE: One of the
 worlds listed here is home:ad.world - this is the ad cube world located in the
 lower left corner of the interface. You don't want to teleport to that world!

 The Options Menu

 On the right side of the WorldsPlayer Interface is an Options button. Many of
 these options are used by worldbuilders, and are listed below:

    * Shaper On/Off
      Brings up or hides the Shaper tools
    * Display Statistics
      Originally this was designed to allow programmers to measure the
      performance and memory usage of the client software, however much of the
      information here is no longer accurate as we transition to a new
      rendering engine.
    * Upgrade Now...
      Tells the server to look for any new world upgrades
    * Dimension Selector
      This allows you to teleport to a given "dimension" on a server. Once a
      set number of users are in a given room, new users will be put into
      another "dimension" where they only interact with each other. It is
      useful mostly to server programmers testing dimension capability.
    * Sign In
      If you are working offline, this option brings up the Sign In box so that
      you can sign in and go online (necessary when saving shared state
      Attributes in your world).
    * Recorder
      This feature allows you to record and play back your movement through a
      world. See The Recorder Feature of the Gamma Procedures doc for more
      info.
    * Condense World Files
      Condenses all the texture files in the currently open world. Used before
      packaging a world to make the download file smaller (See Packaging Worlds
      section of Gamma Procedures).
    * Expand World Files
      Expands the Content.zip (condensed texture files) of the currently open
      world.
    * Texture Dictionary
      Currently not functional.
    * Music Manager
      This brings up a dialog box that allows you to assign music to specific
      rooms in a world. You may specify CD tracks if you are building a room
      designed to be distributed on a multi-session audio CD, MIDI files, MP3
      files, or a URL to a streaming audio file in a format recognizable by
      Windows Media Player.
    * I18N Test
      This just displays some sample text in the languages currently supported
      by Worlds. It is useful to test the display of foreign languages in the
      chat box on various systems.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The Hierarchy of Objects

 Worlds in Gamma are organized as a hierarchy, or "tree" of objects. Each
 object has certain properties, or attributes, which may include other objects.
 Objects may be nested within other objects many levels deep. The hierarchy
 includes every possible aspect of a world, from the most general down to the
 tiniest detail that you can specify. Many objects, like walls and rooms,
 correspond to objects in the real world. Some are more abstract: for example,
 textures and actions are also objects in Gamma. Some objects are simply
 categories or containers to hold other objects.

 At the top level of the hierarchy is the world itself. The properties of a
 world include its URL and all the rooms contained within it. Each room in turn
 has its own properties--including its own exterior backgrounds (potentially
 both Sky/Ground and Infinite Background) not shared or seen from any other
 room.

 A sample portion of the hierarchy is shown in the Hierarchy Tree image below:



 For efficient rendering, Gamma makes a distinction between the Room
 Environment (the walls, portals, and any other objects on the perimeter of the
 room) and the Room Contents, which typically contains any shapes inside of the
 room. Although it is possible to add walls or shapes to the both the Room
 Environment and the Room Contents, it is wise to follow the distinction as a
 rule of thumb. You should particularly avoid putting portals in a Room's
 Contents. See Effects of Draw Order on Speed for details.

 Notice that the camera (!HoloPilot1), the invisible object that represents
 your point of view, is a property of the Room Contents.

 Viewing the Hierarchy of Objects

 The central control panel of Gamma's Shaper is the Properties box (#4 in the
 Shaper image above), where you can see the properties of every object. The
 contents of the Properties box change whenever you select an object in the 3D
 space or select something in the Hierarchy Tree.

 To select an object, right-click any visible object in the 3D viewer and then
 click the Edit Properties button that comes up. The properties of the selected
 object display in the Properties box. White boundary lines identify the
 selected object in the 3D window, and the item you have selected is
 highlighted yellow in the Hierarchy Tree. You can also select an object by
 clicking on its listing in the Hierarchy Tree (even if you can't see the
 object in the 3D viewer it is selected).

 Editing in the Hierarchy of Objects

 When an object in the Hierarchy is selected (such as a wall), the properties
 of that object will appear in the Properties Box. For example, you can name an
 object by editing its Name property - double-click on " Name()" in the
 Properties Box and an Edit Name box will appear where you can type in the
 objects new name. Gamma gives each new object a generic name, such as Rect
 (rectangle), plus a unique identifying number. It is very helpful to add your
 own more descriptive labels to the objects you create. Almost all objects have
 a Name( ) property that you can edit to name the object as you wish. The other
 properties of objects will be covered as you go through the tutorials.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Beginning to Build: Deleting and Adding

 Deleting objects and Undo

 You can't delete an object while you're inside its own Properties list (where
 you'll be if you right-click on it). To Delete any object, select it in the
 Hierarchy Tree (it will then have a yellow rectangle around it). Now you can
 click the Delete button to the right of the Properties Box to actually delete
 it. Objects that you can't right-click on (Actions etc.) can still be deleted
 from whatever list they are in.

 You can Undo most Deletes of an Object, and you can Undo transforms, movement,
 scaling, or any other change in an Edit Box. You have several levels of Undo,
 but no Redo. In order for Undo to work, you must have the Properties box open.

 Adding Walls and 3D Objects

 You create new objects by adding them at the appropriate level of the
 hierarchy in the tree. Click on the Objects tab in the Libraries panel. Click
 on whatever object you would like to add within the Objects Library, and drag
 it to its place in the Hierarchy tree (For example, Room/Contents or
 Room/Environment). The object is added to the Hierarchy Tree with a default
 name (Rect584 for example). Once you have added an object, you can move it to
 any position and scale it to a different size. The standard colors and
 directions are simply a convention to help in orientation and do not restrict
 you.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for creating a wall in a room.

 In addition to the standard architectural objects offered in the Shaper, such
 as walls, floors, and ceilings, you can import objects created in other 3D
 modeling programs. The 3D shape must be saved in an appropriate .RWX or .RWG
 file format. Normally a shape should be included in the Room contents,
 although it is possible to add shapes at other levels of the hierarchy. For
 example, you could add a distant object to the contents of an infinite
 background. You can move and scale 3D shapes just as you would walls.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for creating a Shape in a room.

 See also Utilizing 3D Studio Max files

 Handling Objects as a Group

 Sometimes it is easier to build 3D objects using the standard walls, floors,
 and ceilings in Gamma instead of importing pre-built objects. For example, you
 could build a table using walls for the sides and a small floor for the
 tabletop. (Just as walls are only visible from one side, a floor is a wall
 that is visible from above. If you were to use a ceiling for the tabletop, it
 would only be visible from under the table!)

 When you combine objects in this way, you can group them together in a
 WObject, a virtual object that exists only as an envelope for other objects.
 This allows you to move or scale the group as if it were a single object, or
 Copy and Paste the Wobject as needed.

 You can add an empty WObject to the contents of a room in the same way you
 would add a shape or a wall, then add the components you want to group
 together to the Contents of the WObject. If you decide that you want to group
 objects after you have already created them separately, you can still add an
 empty WObject and then cut and paste the objects into its Contents.

 Naming objects

 Gamma assigns an internal name to all newly created objects. The Gamma-created
 name will be something like Rect096 or Sound442, not an easy sort of name for
 builders to remember. Fortunately, any object in Gamma can be renamed by the
 builder. This makes it a great deal simpler to pick out individual items from
 a long Contents list. Each major class of Gamma object will have a Name
 property. Just right-click the object to open up the Properties box, find the
 Name property, double-click, and type a more practical name that you can
 remember and that helps you better describe the object. Changes in Name will
 also appear anyplace else this object appears in the hierarchy. For instance
 if you change an Action's name you don't have to worry about changing that
 Action's name in a Sensor's Target list - it's already done for you.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on naming an object.

 Moving and scaling objects

 Most likely you're not happy with exactly where the objects end up when you
 add them, or the size. There are several ways to adjust position, orientation
 or size. These can be roughly divided into the "quick and dirty" category and
 the "by the numbers" category.

    Quick and dirty means using the buttons that appear on the Properties box
 whenever an appropriate object is selected. You'll get a rough number output
 of what you're doing with these buttons in a small box that appears on screen.
 Remember that whatever you do, you can undo! The buttons are useful to "rough
 in" an object and for getting a feel of the coordinate system of your room
 while you're moving the objects around visually. The disadvantage of the
 buttons is that it's very hard to be precise, for instance getting the scale
 just right or getting walls to join at corners.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on using these buttons.

 When precision is necessary, you'll want to use either the Transform property
 of an object or the From and To properties (listed in the Properties Box when
 an object is selected). These can be used in a complementary way, but you
 might want to consider these general guidelines. From and To are useful if
 you're trying to fit an object into an existing gap and don't care about
 distortion that might result from nonlinear scaling, and have a good sense of
 the coordinate scheme of your room. The Edit Transform box is useful in most
 other cases, where you can conceive of what you're about to do to your object
 in terms of a number or coordinate, for instance "make this twice as big" or
 "scoot this thing 50 units to the right".

 Go To: Detailed instructions on From and To.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on the Edit Transform box.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Sky, Ground, and Infinite Background

 In Gamma, the sky and ground always meet at a horizon that divides the screen
 exactly in half. This is appropriate for the normal angle of view, but
 produces a very strange effect when you use Page Up or Page Down to tilt the
 angle of view. If you are building a closed room where the sky or ground color
 will never be visible, you can set them both to Null by selecting them and
 clicking Delete. If you were actually to try deleting a wall in a room that
 has the sky and ground set to Null, the sky and ground appear black initially,
 but as you move the camera objects in the foreground will 'paint' across the
 null area and generally look really weird. But setting Sky and Ground to null
 has two important advantages:

   1. There's one less thing for Gamma to draw, so your frame rate will
      increase by a small amount.
   2. Joins of walls at corners won't appear to flash or flicker nearly as
      much, even if they're off by a pixel. This is because when you move the
      camera the very same painting effect is occurring in the space behind the
      visible room and obscuring any 'holes' in your wall.

 Color is pretty much the only thing about a Sky or Ground that you can change.
 If the Sky or Ground color has been set to Null (you'll see Sky Color (null)
 and Ground Color (null) in the Properties Box), and you double click on one of
 these properties, you will be asked if you want to create a new instance:
 click Yes and then you can edit the new Sky or Ground's color.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on changing an object's color.

 If you want to avoid the problems inherent with using the sky and ground
 colors as a background, or you want to apply a background texture such as a
 cloudscape, a prairie, or an ocean view to your World, you should use an
 Infinite Background. An Infinite Background is a Room property, and is
 essentially a room in the exterior space that surrounds the main room. As a
 room in itself it has its own Room Environment where you can add walls, floor,
 ceiling, and other objects. Because the scale never seems to change, a texture
 file applied to the surfaces of the infinite background appears to recede off
 into an infinitely distant view.

 NOTE: To have the Infinite Background appear, you will need to add walls to
 the Infinite Background and then texture the walls appropriately. If you know
 that there's no way that a portion of the infinite background will ever be
 visible, leave it totally blank to speed up rendering. Infinite backgrounds
 aren't always the most efficient way to show an 'outside'. If your distant
 view is framed by a small window, allowing limited movement and field of view,
 you may want to fake it with a backdrop texture file applied to an environment
 wall set behind the window, with the environment wall still located within the
 room. This can be very effective with an intermediate object such as a railing
 or planter to accentuate the parallax effect.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on creating walls in an infinite background.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Moving Objects in 3D

 When moving objects in 3D space, it is helpful to think in terms of the x, y,
 and z axes. For example, when an object moves in a straight line along the
 floor, it is moving up or down the x and y axes. Turning motions are described
 as pitch, roll, or yaw.

 Pitch revolves the object around the x axis.

 Roll revolves the object around the y axis.

 Yaw revolves the object around the z axis.

 Color and Direction

 When you create a new world, color conventions identifying north, south, east,
 and west walls help to orient you in 3D space.

 Each new world opens as a simple template containing a single square room with
 a floor that measures 1000x1000 units, a ceiling, and four walls. The wall
 colors for each new room correspond to the directions they face. You can also
 identify a wall by the coordinates of its bottom left corner:

   Yellow   South-facing    0,1000,0

   Red      West-facing     1000,1000,0

   Magenta  North-facing    1000,0,0

   Cyan     East-facing     0,0,0

 Note: The rectangles representing the walls of a new room are always listed in
 this order in the Properties box.

 Behind these walls, there is an exterior space with a flat field of white
 ground and black sky extending in all directions. This space becomes visible
 when you delete a wall.

 The Freedom of Virtual Geometry

 The x,y,z coordinates, the wall colors, and the directional conventions all
 apply only to a single room. Each room has its own separate coordinate system
 and, for all practical purposes, its own compass. For example, you can connect
 the north wall of one room to the east wall of another room. Likewise, the
 relative size and orientation of rooms need not be logically consistent. Large
 rooms can fit inside of small ones.

 This makes it somewhat more difficult to orient yourself as you build. But it
 means that the virtual spaces you can build are limited only by your
 imagination, not by what is physically possible in the real world.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Connecting Rooms

 When you build additional rooms in your world, the Shaper creates them as
 completely independent spaces. Each new room has its own environment, its own
 exterior background, and its own coordinate system with 0,0,0 located at the
 bottom left corner of the east [cyan] wall.

 You build portals to create a doorway, a passageway, a window, or any opening
 that allows a view between two rooms. Just like the one-sided walls in Gamma,
 any single portal offers only a one- way view looking out from the room where
 it was created. So, to build a realistic doorway that you can see through and
 travel through in both directions, you must create a separate portal in each
 room and then connect the two portals.

 Portals can also be used to connect rooms in separate worlds. In this case,
 the portal opens a connection to a different world server and the user may
 have to wait briefly while the next world is loading.

 Because each room is a completely separate environment with its own coordinate
 system, you can also use portals to build unrealistic virtual architecture.
 For example, going back through a doorway could lead you to a different place
 than you came from. You could leave a room through a door on the east wall and
 find yourself immediately entering again on the west side. Or two adjacent
 rooms connected by portals could have windows looking out on different
 landscapes.

 Note that portals do not open a view at all unless they are connected to other
 rooms.

 Gamma does not render the portions of a room that are not visible beyond a
 portal. For this reason, you can use portals judiciously to divide large or
 complex rooms up into smaller units that render more quickly and speed up your
 frame rate.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for creating a new room.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for creating a portal

 Go To: Detailed instructions for connecting portals

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Connecting Portals

 You should create both Portals first before trying to connect them, referring
 to each portal by name. Note that you can create the second room (and its
 corresponding portal) while still in the first room -- to do this, add the
 second room to the Rooms List level of the Hierarchy Tree, then add the new
 portal to that second Room's Environment Contents, following the steps
 outlined in Creating Portals. For details on creating a new room, see Creating
 a New Room in the Procedures document.

 NOTE: If you ever see this type of message:
 Portal Portal331 specifies a connection to null#Room#SomePortal which isn't a
 portal!

 you have probably made an error in naming one or both of your connecting
 portals. Double-check that you've spelled the Portal Name correctly (Portal
 Names are case sensitive). If you've fixed any spelling errors, your Portals
 should behave normally and the error message will disappear unless that Portal
 really doesn't exist.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Textures

 The visual richness of a virtual world is largely determined by the use of
 textures: bitmap art files that you apply to surfaces. You can apply texture
 files to walls, floors, ceilings, and holograms. (The texture of a shape built
 in another 3D modeling program should be applied before you import the shape
 into Gamma.)

 You can use a single image to fill a wall surface, or you can tile an image to
 repeat it at any scale. You could design the facade of a building as a single
 image if the architectural detailing does not lend itself to repetition. You
 might want to repeat an image only twice for a symmetrical effect, or a few
 times for a panelled style. Or, you can repeat smaller tiles many times for
 effective floor patterns, carpeting, wallpaper, brick walls, and many other
 possible styles.

 You should create all your texture images at 128x128 pixels. This is the size
 that Gamma requires, and images of other sizes will be scaled to 128x128
 automatically if they aren't stored in this size, sometimes with unpredictable
 results. There are higher resolution options available in which case your
 textures could be 128x256, 256x256, or 256x128. However, use hi res images
 sparingly - they will slow down the navigation through your world if you use
 too many.

 See Designing for Performance

 Go To: Detailed instructions for applying textures to an object.

 Tiling

 When the Shaper imports a texture file, it automatically scales it to fit the
 wall exactly with one image, changing the aspect ratio as necessary. By
 changing the tile size, you can scale and repeat the image. The default tile
 size is described as [0,0] regardless of the size of the wall. Any other value
 you set represents units of width by units of height. For example, when using
 a wall sized 1000 wide by 240 high, a tile size of [250,120] repeats the image
 four times across and twice vertically.

 You can also set one value only, if you wish, and leave the other at 0. For
 example, a tile size of [0,120] on the same standard wall will apply the image
 as two stripes across the full width of the wall.

 The Shaper includes a Library of sample textures that you can practice with.
 You can also add your own images to the Library, making it especially easy to
 access and preview them. See Using Libraries for more details.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for changing the default tiling of a texture.

 Colors

 You change the color of an object by specifying a mix of red, green, and blue.
 Walls that use color rather than texture allow Gamma to run at a faster frame
 rate. If you have built complex rooms that are running too slowly, you may
 want to use color rather than texture for walls that are not visually
 prominent.

 For exterior spaces, you can set the color of the sky and ground but you
 cannot apply textures to them. If you want to use a texture for distant views
 in exterior space, you must use an infinite background. See Sky, Ground, and
 Infinite Background for more details.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for changing the color of an object.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Lighting

 The Shaper offers three different types of lighting that affect the texture or
 color of an object. Objects that contain lighting parameters (such as
 rectangles) can be edited in their Material Properties list, as follows:

    * Ambient Reflection Coefficient sets the general level of reflected light
      off of the object's material. If the Ambient light is set at it's highest
      (.75) then Diffuse and Specular lighting will not work.
    * Diffuse Reflection Coefficient sets the level of the darkest shadows.
    * Specular Reflection Coefficient sets the level of highlights.

 The color and direction of the light source can also be changed. See Light
 Source Direction and Light Color listed in the properties of a Room (click on
 the Room name in the Hierarchy Tree for the Room Properties to appear in the
 Properties Box).

 You may also want to consider using textures specially created for lighting
 effects. For example, a pool of light under a lamp can be added as a texture.
 You can also use animation for lighting effects such as firelight.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Holograms: a 3D object with only one side

 A hologram is a fake 3D object. It sits there looking like a 3D object, and
 you can move around it and view it from all sides. A Hologram is a series of
 images in a list, each image a different view of the object. A hologram can
 have as many "sides" as you want - for example, the holographic avatars have
 anywhere from 2 to 8 sides. When you walk up to a hologram, a different side
 faces you depending on your orientation to that object. Holograms can be very
 effective production shortcuts because they are usually simpler to create than
 true 3D objects and they have less impact on frame rate. They are most
 suitable for representing objects that are symmetrical on a vertical axis, or
 unobtrusive background fixtures. A tree, a column, a bush, a post, or a bottle
 can all be effective as holograms.

 A hologram is a .mov file that you make from the series of .bmps that make up
 the different sides.

 Go To: Detailed instructions on creating a Hologram.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Using Libraries

 Libraries are browsable catalogs of
 objects. You use Libraries to easily add
 objects and behaviors to your 3D worlds.

 Several standard Libraries are provided in    [Objects Library]
 Gamma, organized in the following             A sample of what's in the
 categories:                                   Objects Library

    * Objects
    * Behaviors
    * Textures
    * Actions
    * Attributes

Go to the Libraries section of the Gamma Procedures document to see a
complete listing of all the Library catalogs and how to use the them.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Behaviors and Actions

 Behaviors and actions are what makes Gamma more than just a glorified CAD
 program. They allow you to add movement to your objects, build in custom
 logic, provide interactivity and make your world an exciting and dynamic
 place. The distinction between behaviors and actions has to do with how they
 will start running. A behavior needs no sensor, because it will start acting
 as soon as you create that behavior in an object, and won't stop until you
 replace it with another behavior or exit the world. By contrast, an action
 requires a sensor that will start it acting. This allows you the flexibility
 to have the action start on some world-specific logic that users can start
 themselves, for instance when they click on something. Or you can pause
 running actions and resume them later. Actions aren't just movement, either:
 they include some basic scripting and multimedia capabilities as well.

 Actions and behaviors are customizable as Java programs. In order to create an
 action or behavior that will interact properly with other objects, you need to
 know the Gamma object hierarchy, the underlying methods of related classes and
 a fair amount of Java programming. But it can be done. Some of the actions
 included in the Library were written by programmers other than the primary
 Gamma programmers, after only a few weeks of exposure to Gamma and Java. The
 compiled versions of actions show up in the GDK as .CLASS files, so if you do
 compile your own actions you'll need to give them this extension. Note:
 writing custom behaviors is beyond the scope of this document.

 Go To: Detailed instructions for adding a behavior to an object

 Go to: Detailed instructions for adding an action to an object

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Designing for Performance

 Here are tips for designing worlds that render quickly in Gamma. All times are
 for a Dell P133 with Matrox Millenium, 8-bit color, running the new Worlds
 console at 640x480 (i.e. the rendering window is quite a bit smaller than
 640x480).

 Rules of Thumb

 These rules are derived from the facts&figures section below.

   1. Put more into the environment.
   2. Prevent overdrawing.
   3. Use faster surface types.
   4. Use CD, then music, then sound.
   5. Use fewer objects.

 Put More Into The Environment

 The number one reason for slow spaces is having objects in the contents of the
 rooms, rather than in the environment. The difference is that z-buffering is
 permitted when Gamma renders the contents, and z-buffering is sloooow.
 Theoretically, z-buffering should impact your frame times only when
 intersecting objects (not on the display; intersecting objects are those whose
 axis-aligned 3d bounding boxes overlap) are rendered.

 Prevent Overdrawing

 The second big reason for slow worlds is too much overdrawing. Overdrawing is
 when a pixel on the display is painted by the renderer multiple times. The
 renderer works by first drawing the farthest-away objects, then the nearer
 ones, so that the farther ones are covered by the nearer ones. This is called
 the Painter's Algorithm (PA), after the way oil-painters work. PA can result
 in a particular part of the screen being repainted multiple times, for
 instance first by the sky, then by a cloud image, then by a wall obscuring the
 cloud, then by a bookcase between the viewer and the wall, and so forth.

 Such overdrawing drastically increases frame times. The number of pixels
 painted is the primary determinant of the speed of rendering, so if every
 pixel on the screen is painted twice, the frame time will be twice as long.

 You might think, along the lines of the oil painter analogy, that the system
 will not paint the entire background before covering it up with the foreground
 stuff. Why should it? An oil painter wouldn't bother with huge parts of the
 background that'll just be covered up. But Renderware doesn't work that way.
 It paints every little bit of every background item before moving on to the
 closer items.

 The first step is to turn off your sky and ground colors. These paint over the
 entire screen, which is almost always partially or entirely covered by walls
 and floors and other images. If the sky or ground can't be seen, there's no
 reason to paint it! And even when part of it can be seen, there's often no
 reason to paint all of it. In some cases, such as with enclosed gardens, it
 might make sense to use a sky-colored surface as a ceiling rather than using
 Gamma's sky color feature, as it'll look the same and won't overdraw all those
 pixels behind the garden walls. Getting rid of sky and ground colors gains a
 relatively small savings in frame time, but it's easy to do so it's a good
 place to start.

 Your most powerful tool for overdraw prevention is the portal. Portals tell
 the system to draw only a limited screen rectangle full of pixels, no matter
 how large the room on the other side of the portal. It provides the world
 designer with control over how much of the background is to be drawn. The most
 direct way to use this is in considering a room to be two rooms. Often a large
 room with internal walls will render more quickly if broken into separate
 roomlets at the internal-wall boundaries. The internal walls then become
 external walls for the roomlets. In general, internal walls should trigger
 your overdraw-avoidance instincts, as they "cover up" other parts of the room,
 exactly what you're trying to avoid.

 Another similar case is when doing an outdoors scene. Often there will be an
 indoorish courtyard or hall, over the top of which one can see a distant
 vista. When done as a single room, this results in overdrawing of the
 courtyard walls over the vista. The solution is to make two rooms: one for the
 courtyard, and one for the "background" room, connected by portals set above
 the courtyard walls. This way, there is never any overdraw.

 Sometimes one wants to make partially see-through walls. These guarantee
 overdraw of the entire wall, a disaster for performance seekers. A partial
 solution is to arrange the holes in the see-through wall in clusters, and to
 put a portal behind each hole or cluster, as "windows" to another background
 room. This avoids overdraw of the nontransparent parts of the wall. There is a
 per-portal cost, so one can't add portal windows willy-nilly, but it's usually
 possible to design a good compromise so that a few portal windows can cover
 all the holes efficiently, with little overdraw.

 Remember that the transparent part of a see-through wall takes some time to
 draw, it's not free. So an almost-entirely transparent wall is more costly
 than a few well-positioned smaller walls, with empty space in between. Uses
 less RAM for the images that way, too. This means that it's best to either
 have lots of holes, so that the surface can be instead represented as a few
 small surfaces with lots of uncovered space between them (therefore there's
 little overdraw), or to have a surface with few holes so that a few portal
 windows can service them, again giving little overdraw. The worst situation is
 a half-covered surface, with holes all over the place (like a latticework),
 because neither solution works so one is stuck with a large area of overdraw.

 A portal hidden completely by a wall is overdrawn in the same way. Since
 portals are even more slow (slightly) than regular objects, overdrawing one of
 them is particularly wasteful. The situation in which this occurs is when one
 has a door that opens and closes, and when closed the portal is covered up.
 The solution is to make the portal invisible, using a behavior, when the door
 is closed, and make it visible again when the door is opened.

 Summary:

    * Turn off sky and ground colors.
    * Break rooms with internal walls into roomlets with only external walls.
    * Use portal windows for see-through textures.
    * Turn off portals behind doors.

 Use Faster Surface Types

 The first rule mentioned above, namely use environment rather than contents to
 avoid z-buffering, is a special case of a more general rule: use the fastest
 types of surfaces you can. See the table in the facts&figures section below
 for a detailed list.

 Rule #1 is #1 because z-buffered are by far the most costly type of surface:
 one z-buffered wall can ruin your whole frame time. But there is another
 important rule that can be divined from the table: try to use untextured
 (solid) surfaces. Solid surfaces are so fast in comparison to textured ones as
 to be practically instantaneous. Every 10% of your user's screen that is drawn
 using solid surfaces rather than textured ones will make your frame time
 almost 10% faster.

 The trick is to integrate solid surfaces into your world without making it
 look primitive and CAD-like. Try using solid surfaces sparingly, such as at
 the junctures between wall panels or in alternation with textured walls, to
 keep the textured look while getting a few tens of percent of speed increase.

 Avatars are an area where there are several choices of surface. One can use
 solid-colored models, simple or complex, holograms, or textured models. The
 choice is important because avatars are always overdrawn, so they can slow
 frame times a lot if one isn't careful. The fastest choice is solid-colored
 simple models. We're all sick of boring choices like cubes and pyramids, but
 by adding animation as spice these can become a lot more interesting. A
 rotating, morphing starfish/pyramid could be as interesting as a hologram.
 Animation adds practically nothing to frame times but can enliven avatars
 immensely. The next fastest choice is a hologram, followed closely by a
 complex solid-colored model, but both of these are much much slower than the
 first choice.

 Summary:

    * Avoid z-buffering!
    * Use untextured walls.
    * Use untextured but interesting models for avatars.

 Use CD, Then Music, Then Sound

 Gamma uses almost zero processor time to play music off of a CD: 0.5 ms.
 Playing an uncompressed .wav or a .mid file uses 10ms or 11.5ms respectively,
 still acceptable. Playing a GSM compressed .wav takes much more, and
 additional 60ms every couple of frames, causing significant jerkiness.

 Running a conversation through a background vocaltech program adds an
 additional 13ms while doing nothing, plus 10ms more (23ms total) if you are
 listening or talking to someone, plus peaks of even more.

 Use Fewer Objects

 Gamma's collision detection works best in rooms with fewer than 40 objects.
 Since everything inside a .rwx file is treated as a single object, you should
 be sure to group all the parts of a single object within one rwx file where
 possible, rather than splitting the object into several parts that are each a
 Gamma object.

 One of the biggest costs of having too many objects is that whenever you move,
 Gamma's collision detection looks at all the objects in a room to see if
 you've collided with them. If you can't move the objects into rwx files, the
 next best thing is to mark most of the parts of the objects as non-bumpable.
 Be sure to mark not-present objects (those that you have marked as invisible
 until an action makes them appear) as non-bumpable too, unless you
 specifically want the user bumping into something invisible.

 For objects with polygons, there is a per-polygon cost. For objects over 1000
 polys, far-away objects take almost as long as close-up objects (until they
 start filling appreciable portions of the overall view window, which doesn't
 usually happen for most objects). The formula on a P90 is that far-away
 objects take 7ms + 7 per 1000 polys, and somewhat close objects (avatars at
 typical viewing distance) take an additional 16ms. If the polygonal object is
 used in an articulated avatar, there is an additional 14ms for the background
 animation processing that is always going on, whether the object is in view or
 not.

 What these polygon timings mean is that you probably don't want to use more
 than a few thousand polys total. And since the cost is almost as high for
 far-away (very small) objects, design your worlds so that few high-polygon
 objects are visible at the same time.

 Facts and Figures

    * 8ms overhead per frame.
    * 0.5ms/object-in-room extra overhead when the camera is moving.
    * Different surface types, for drawing a regular screenful:
         o 5ms -- untextured (solid) surface
         o 8ms -- transparent surface
         o 10ms -- 100-polygon untextured model
         o 15ms -- face-on textured plane from an rwx.
         o 22ms -- facer or face-on textured wall
         o 28ms -- 1000-polygon untextured model
         o 32ms -- textured surface
         o 60ms -- zbuffered textured surface
    * up to 0.3ms/off-screen image, 0.4ms/hologram, in a visible room.
    * Times for minimally visible objects:
         o less than 0.5ms/rect or hologram.
         o 2ms/portal in addition to the costs for the far-side room.
         o 5ms/venus (1000-polygon model), 7ms if partially clipped.

[Top of Page]
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Updated 02/15/01   GDK 1848        All Content © Worlds.com, 2001


